BSM components and rule templates references (#2977)
sensu/sensu-docs: content/sensu-go/6.3/observability-pipeline/observe-schedule/rule-templates.md

---
title: "Rule templates reference"
linkTitle: "Rule Templates Reference"

> reference_title: "Rule templates"

Reviewer: Maybe we should add "BSM" or "Business Service Monitoring" in the title? Unless it's clear in the generated output that the context of "Rule Templates" is that of BSM.

type: "reference"

> description: "Sensu's rule templates are resources that Sensu applies to business service components. The rules define the conditions under which Sensu will consider a service component online, degraded, or offline. Read this reference to learn more about Sensu's rule templates for business service management."

Reviewer: s/management/monitoring

weight: 70
version: "6.3"
product: "Sensu Go"
menu: 
  sensu-go-6.3:
    parent: observe-schedule
---

**COMMERCIAL FEATURE**: Access business service management, including rule templates, in the packaged Sensu Go distribution.
For more information, see [Get started with commercial features][4].

Rule templates are resources that Sensu applies to business service [components][3].

> The rules define the conditions under which Sensu will consider a service component online, degraded, or offline.

Reviewer: I think that's correct at a high level, but in reality it's even more general: the rules emit an event you can completely customize. The rules get a selection of events (as defined by the Service Component's Query) as input and they can do what they want with this information.

Rules apply to aggregate data derived from a service component’s selection of Sensu Go events.

> In rule templates, you configure the conditions for creating an event with an ECMAScript 5 (JavaScript) expression.

Author: ```suggestion
Rule templates specify the conditions for creating an event with an ECMAScript 5 (JavaScript) expression.
```

Reviewer: It's even more than that: your Javascript can create arbitrary events!

> When you add rule templates by reference in your service component definitions, Sensu evaluate events according to the monitoring rules you configure in the rule template.

Author: ```suggestion
When you add rule templates by reference in your service component definitions, Sensu evaluate events according to the monitoring rules configured in the rule template.
```

Author: I remember Sean saying many users will not need to configure their own rule templates because we are providing some out-of-the-box templates that will meet all of their BSM needs. If I understand that correctly, I want to explain that here -- and should add a section that describes the built-in rule templates.

> Monitoring rules create events when one or more thresholds are exceeded; for example, a threshold might be fewer than 70% of a service component's selected events have a check status of OK.

Reviewer: That's specific to the rule template Sean demonstrated; generally speaking, a rule template can have different parameters (or none). That sentence should be moved to your future section that focuses on the built-in rule templates.

Components can reference more than one rule template.
Sensu evaluates each rule separately, and each rule produces its own event as output.

## Rule template example

This example rule template creates an event when the percentage of events with the given status exceed the given threshold:

> 

Author: If I understand correctly, the threshold is "given" in each component that references this rule template, is that correct?

Reviewer: That's correct; the idea is that one writes a rule template once as a general, parameterized object that can be used in multiple places. When components want to make use of a rule template, they "instantiate it" by providing its name and any arguments it may require.

For example, given a template that requires 1 argument called `threshold_ok` that, in essence, does the following:
```
if numberEventsOK < threshold_ok {
  emit warning event
}
```

A service component chooses what `threshold_ok` value it wants in the above logic, and different components can use different values based on whatever makes sense for them.

{{< language-toggle >}}

{{< code yml >}}
---
type: RuleTemplate
api_version: bsm/v1
metadata:
  name: status-threshold
  namespace: default

>   created_by: admin

Reviewer: This field is automatically added and shouldn't be part of the object's specification.

spec:
  description: Creates an event when the percentage of events with the given status exceed the given threshold
  arguments:
    required:
      - threshold
    properties:
      status:
        type: string
        default: non-zero
        enum:
          - non-zero
          - warning
          - critical
          - unknown
      threshold:
        type: number
        description: Numeric value that triggers an event when surpassed
  eval: |
    var statusMap = {
      "non-zero": 1,
      "warning": 1,
      "critical": 2,
    };
    function main(args) {
      var total = sensu.events.count();
      var num = sensu.events.count(args.status);
      if (num / total <= args.threshold) {
        return;
      }

>       return sensu.new_event({

Reviewer: We have removed the `sensu.NewEvent()` API ; one needs to directly mutate the `event` object representing the event that's going to be emitted by the rule. The following should do the trick:

```
event.status = statusMap[args.status]
```

  }
}
{{< /code >}}

{{< /language-toggle >}}

## Rule template specification

### Top-level attributes

type         | 
-------------|------
description  | Top-level attribute that specifies the resource type. For rule template configuration, the type should always be `RuleTemplate`.
required     | Required for rule template configuration in `wrapped-json` or `yaml` format.
type         | String
example      | {{< language-toggle >}}
{{< code yml >}}
type: RuleTemplate
{{< /code >}}
{{< code json >}}
{
  "type": "RuleTemplate"
}
{{< /code >}}
{{< /language-toggle >}}

api_version  | 
-------------|------
description  | Top-level attribute that specifies the Sensu API group and version. For rule template configuration in this version of Sensu, the api_version should always be `bsm/v1`.
required     | Required for rule template configuration in `wrapped-json` or `yaml` format.
type         | String
example      | {{< language-toggle >}}
{{< code yml >}}
api_version: bsm/v1
{{< /code >}}
{{< code json >}}
{
  "api_version": "bsm/v1"
}
{{< /code >}}
{{< /language-toggle >}}

metadata     |      |
-------------|------

> description  | Top-level scope that contains the rule template's `name` and `namespace` as well as the `created_by` field.

Reviewer: I'm pretty sure `created_by` should be left for the API to decide.

Author: We generally include it in the spec tables

description  | ECMAScript 5 (JavaScript) expression for the rule template to evaluate.
required     | true
type         | String
example      | {{< language-toggle >}}
{{< code yml >}}
eval: |
    var statusMap = {
      "non-zero": 1,
      "warning": 1,
      "critical": 2,
    };
    function main(args) {
      var total = sensu.events.count();
      var num = sensu.events.count(args.status);
      if (num / total <= args.threshold) {
        return;
      }
      return sensu.new_event({
        status: statusMap[args.status],
        /* ... */,
      });
    }
{{< /code >}}
{{< code json >}}
{
  "eval": "var statusMap = {\n  \"non-zero\": 1,\n  \"warning\": 1,\n  \"critical\": 2,\n};\nfunction main(args) {\n  var total = sensu.events.count();\n  var num = sensu.events.count(args.status);\n  if (num / total <= args.threshold) {\n    return;\n  }\n  return sensu.new_event({\n    status: statusMap[args.status],\n    /* ... */,\n  });\n}"
}
{{< /code >}}
{{< /language-toggle >}}

#### Arguments attributes

required     | 
-------------|------ 
description  | List of keys the rule template argument requires. The listed keys must be configured in the [properties][2] object.

> required     | true

Reviewer: I don't think `required` is required.

required     | true
type         | Array
example      | {{< language-toggle >}}
{{< code yml >}}
required:
  - threshold
{{< /code >}}
{{< code json >}}
{
  "required": [
    "threshold"
  ]
}
{{< /code >}}
{{< /language-toggle >}}

<a name="rule-properties"></a>

properties   | 
-------------|------ 
description  | Lists of properties that define the rule template's behavior. In [JSON Schema][1].
required     | true
type         | Array
example      | {{< language-toggle >}}
{{< code yml >}}
properties:
  status:
    type: string
    default: non-zero
    enum:
      - non-zero
      - warning
      - critical
      - unknown
    threshold:
      type: number
      description: Numeric value that triggers an event when surpassed
{{< /code >}}
{{< code json >}}
{
  "properties": {
    "status": {
      "type": "string",
      "default": "non-zero",
      "enum": [
        "non-zero",
        "warning",
        "critical",
        "unknown"
      ]
    },
    "threshold": {
      "type": "number",
      "description": "Numeric value that triggers an event when surpassed"
    }
  }
}
{{< /code >}}
{{< /language-toggle >}}

[1]: https://json-schema.org/
[2]: #rule-properties

> [3]: ../components

Author: ```suggestion
[3]: ../service-components/
```

        "threshold"
      ],
      "properties": {
        "status": {
          "type": "string",
          "default": "non-zero",
          "enum": [
            "non-zero",
            "warning",
            "critical",
            "unknown"
          ]
        },
        "threshold": {
          "type": "number",
          "description": "Numeric value that triggers an event when surpassed"
        }
      }
    },
    "eval": "var statusMap = {\n  \"non-zero\": 1,\n  \"warning\": 1,\n  \"critical\": 2,\n};\nfunction main(args) {\n  var total = sensu.events.count();\n  var num = sensu.events.count(args.status);\n  if (num / total <= args.threshold) {\n    return;\n  }\n  return event.status = statusMap[args.status],\n  });\n}"
  }
}
{{< /code >}}

{{< /language-toggle >}}

## Built-in rule templates

Sensu's business service monitoring (BSM) includes built-in rule templates that address common BSM use cases.
These built-in rule templates are ready to use with your service components.
Reference the rule template name in the `rules.template` field and configure the arguments in the `rules.template.arguments` object in your service component resource definitions.

> 

Author: Are there more built-in rule templates -- if so, where can I find them?

Reviewer: As it stands, we only have 1: `aggregate-rule-template`.

## Built-in rule template: Aggregate

Sensu's business service monitoring (BSM) includes a built-in rule template, `aggregate`, that allows you to treat the results of multiple disparate check executions executed across multiple disparate systems as a single result (event).
This built-in rule templates are ready to use with your service components.

Reference the rule template name in the `rules.template` field and configure the arguments in the `rules.template.arguments` object in your service component resource definitions.

### Aggregate rule template example

Use the `aggregate` rule template for services that can be considered healthy as long as a minimum threshold is satisfied.
For example, you might set the minimum threshold at 10 web servers with an OK status or 70% of processes running with an OK status.

The `aggregate` rule template is useful in dynamic environments and environments with some tolerance for failure.

To view the `aggregate` resource definition:

{{< language-toggle >}}

{{< code yml >}}
sensuctl RuleTemplate info aggregate --format yaml
{{< /code >}}

{{< code json >}}
sensuctl RuleTemplate info aggregate --format wrapped-json
{{< /code >}}

> 

Author: I don't know if these commands will actually work -- I have not been able to get sensuctl info to work with either rule templates or service components.

Author: Confirmed they do not work: https://sensu.slack.com/archives/C60EEQFH8/p1616508141272600
